notes.md, before:

# Fast.ai course v3 notes by logancyang

The philosophy of this course is to get the hands dirty with code and build as many models as possible to gain experience.

In the [fast.ai forum](https://forums.fast.ai/latest) there is a "Summarize this topic" button for big treads, it shows only the most liked replies.

## Lesson 1 Pets

```py
# Shows the module imported from, function signature with types
# such as url:str, fname:Union[pathlib.Path, str]=None
# Union[...] means it can be any of the type in this list
help(func)

# python3 path object can be used like this
path_img = path/'image'

# ImageDataBunch in fastai has a factory method from_name_re() to use regex to get the data and labels
# Normalize to square image, size 224 is very commonly used
data = ImageDataBunch.from_name_re(
    path_img, fnames, pat, ds_tfms=get_transforms(), size=224, bs=bs
).normalize(imagenet_stats)
```

A `DataBunch` object in fastai contains everything about data. It has training, validation, test data, all the labels.

```py
# normalize the data in the DataBunch object to 0 mean 1 std
# in this case, RGB channels with be 0 mean and 1 std
data.normalize(imagenet_stats)

# Always take a look at the data
data.show_batch(rows=3, figsize=(7,6))

print(data.classes)
# data.c is the number of classes
len(data.classes), data.c
```

`Learner` in fastai is a model object, it takes in the `DataBunch` object and model architecture. It also let you specify the metric to look at for training.

```py
# Note that models.resnet34 is pretrained on imagenet
# error_rate is for validation set, because creating a DataBunch object automatically creates the validation set
learn = cnn_learner(data, models.resnet34, metrics=error_rate)
learn.model
# fit_one_cycle() is much better than fit() (paper in 2018), always use it. 4 is the # epoch to run, it's a good place to start
learn.fit_one_cycle(4)
# This can saves the model trained on different DataBunch to different places
learn.save('stage-1')
```

To interpret the output of a learner,

```py
# ClassificationInterpretation has a factory method from_learner,
# it takes in a learner object and returns a ClassificationInterpretation object
interp = ClassificationInterpretation.from_learner(learn)

losses,idxs = interp.top_losses()
len(data.valid_ds)==len(losses)==len(idxs)

# This is the most useful tool, it plots the examples the model got wrong
# with biggest losses, and show titles as
# `predicted / actual / score for predicted class / score for actual class`
interp.plot_top_losses(9, figsize=(15,11))

# Use doc() to check how to use, click `show in doc` to documentation website for more details and source code
doc(interp.plot_top_losses)

# Another useful tool, confusion matrix
interp.plot_confusion_matrix(figsize=(12,12), dpi=60)

# Yet another, the most useful, prints the most wrong ones (predicted, actual, # times)
interp.most_confused(min_val=2)
```

Previously we called `fit_one_cycle(4)`, **it only trains the last layer!!** The whole model is frozen by default!

*Note: transfer learning is always a two-step process, train the last layer for some epochs first, and then unfreeze the whole model for some more training/fine-tuning*

```py
# After training the last layer, we unfreeze the whole model
learn.unfreeze()
```

When we unfreeze the whole model and retrain, the error rate is actually worse than before.

Now, load the stage 1 model back on again, we need `lr_find` to find a good learning rate. The default learning rate is something like `0.003`. We need to change it.

The learning rate is the most important hyperparameter.

Use `learn.recorder.plot()` to plot `learning rate vs loss` graph and set the learning rate range to the steepest downward slope.

Next, unfreeze the model and use that learning rate

```py
learn.unfreeze()
# Pass a range of learning rate from 1e-6 to 1e-4
# means first layers use 1e-6 and last layers use 1e-4
# Good rule of thumb, set the right side of slice to be 10x smaller
# than default lr, and left to be at least 10x smaller than the lowest
# point in the lr vs loss graph
learn.fit_one_cycle(2, max_lr=slice(1e-6,1e-4))
```

Now it gets better than stage 1!

With these two stages, the model can be already really good. It is at least average Kaggle practitioner level.

Next, we can use a bigger model - resnet50.

If GPU runs out of memory, use smaller batch size. It can be set in the DataBunch creation.

Again, the two-stage workflow

```py
data = ImageDataBunch.from_name_re(path_img, fnames, pat,
    ds_tfms=get_transforms(), size=299, bs=bs//2).normalize(imagenet_stats)

learn = cnn_learner(data, models.resnet50, metrics=error_rate)
# Stage 1
learn.fit_one_cycle(8)
learn.save('stage-1-50')
# Stage 2
learn.unfreeze()
learn.lr_find()
learn.recorder.plot()
# Pick learning rate range around the steepest downward slope
learn.fit_one_cycle(3, max_lr=slice(1e-6,1e-4))
# Evaluation
interp = ClassificationInterpretation.from_learner(learn)
interp.most_confused(min_val=2)
```

Note:
- For an imagenet-style dataset, it has data in folders named with the labels. MNIST for example, has images for `3` in a folder named `3`. Use `ImageDataBunch.from_folder(...)`
- For a csv file with columns `[filepath, label]`, use `ImageDataBunch.from_csv(...)`
- For data where labels are in the filename, use regex and `ImageDataBunch.from_name_re(...)`
- For more complex cases, construct any function and pass into `ImageDataBunch.from_name_func(...)`

What's really cool is that the documentation of fastai is actually a collection of Jupyter Notebooks with working example code!

Success story: a fastai alumnus created a security anomaly detection software by using the exact code for this lesson on mouse trajectories.

There are examples where problems can be converted into an image problem and apply CNN. Such as audio to spectral form.

### Homework 1

Use my own dataset to train an image classifier.

## Lesson 2 Data Cleaning and Production. SGD from Scratch

The notebook "Lesson 2 Download" has code for downloading images from Google images search result in parallel. It is a great way to create my own image dataset.

Note: `ImageDataBunch` can create validation set with `valid_pct`. ALWAYS SET RANDOM SEED BEFORE CREATING THE VALIDATION SET. We need the same validation set for each run.

Other times, randomness is good because we need to know the model runs stably with randomness.

DL models are pretty good at randomly noisy data. But "biased noisy" data is not good.

```py
# Fastai way of opening an image for inspection
img = open_image(path/'black'/'00000021.jpg')
```

### Facilitate experiments with notebook GUI widgets

There is an in-notebook GUI widget called `fastai.widgets.ImageCleaner` for cleaning the dataset. It has buttons to remove problematic examples and creates a new cleaned.csv from where you can create a new ImageDataBunch with the corrected labels to continue training your model.

These things are called `ipywidgets`.

### Put models in production

Inference on CPU is good enough for the vast majority of use cases. Inference on GPU is a big hassle, you have to deal with batching and queueing, etc. Unless the website has extremely high traffic, inferece on CPU is a much better choice, and it can be horizontally scaled easily.

```py
defaults.device = torch.device('cpu')
# Open image for inspection
img = open_image(path/'black'/'00000021.jpg')
img
```

The code below loads the trained model and is run at web app starting time once, should run fairly quickly.

```py
# We create our Learner in production enviromnent like this, just make sure that path contains the file 'export.pkl' from before
learn = load_learner(path)
```

Then we can do inference in the web application,

```
# inference
pred_class, pred_idx, outputs = learn.predict(img)
pred_class
```

The endpoint should look like (this example is for Starlette app)

```py
@app.route("/classify-url", methods=["GET"])
async def classify_url(request):
    bytes = await get_bytes(request.query_params["url"])
    img = open_image(BytesIO(bytes))
    _,_,losses = learner.predict(img)
    return JSONResponse({
        "predictions": sorted(
            zip(cat_learner.data.classes, map(float, losses)),
            key=lambda p: p[1],
            reverse=True
        )
    })
```

Note: Starlette is similar to Flask but supports modern `async` and `await` for Python 3. FastAPI is another option.

### Common Training Problems

- Learning rate
- Number of epochs

If validation loss explodes, learning rate is too high. **Decrease the learning rate.**

If training loss is higher than validation loss, it means **underfitting**, either learning rate is too low or number of epochs too low. **Try higher learning rate or more epochs**.

If the **error rate goes down and up again**, it's probably **overfitting**. But it's pretty hard to overfit with the settings in fastai here. In this case, if the learning rate is already good and the model is trained a long time but we are still not satisfied with the error rate (note fastai error rate is always validation error), it can mean that we **need more data**. There is no shortcut to know how much data we need in advance. But sometimes we don't need that much data we thought we needed.

*Note: Some say if training loss is lower than validation loss, it's overfitting. IT IS NOT TRUE!! Any model that's trained correctly always have training loss lower than validation loss. That is right.*

*Another note: unbalanced classes is often NOT a problem, it just works. Jeremy spent years experimenting and thinks it's not a problem, no need to do oversampling for less common classes, it just works.*

Rule of thumb for training flow and setting learning rate

```py
default_lr = 3e-3
learn.fit_one_cycle(4, default_lr)
learn.unfreeze()
learn.fit_one_cycle(4, slice(steepest_pt_in_plot, default_lr/10))
```

In Lesson 2 SGD notebook, we generate some data points for a linear regression.

```py
n=100
# tensor n by 2, all ones
x = torch.ones(n,2)
# In PyTorch, any function that ends with _ means no return and modify in-place!
# With ., int becomes float
x[:,0].uniform_(-1.,1)
x[:5]
a = tensor(3.,2)
# Note in Python '@' is matmult. It's more general tensor product in pytorch
y = x@a + torch.rand(n)
```

The above is 95% we need to know about PyTorch
- create a tensor
- update a tensor
- tensor product

Note: The `rank` of a tensor is the number of dimensions, or axes. An RGB image is a rank 3 tensor. A vector is a rank 1 tensor. Tensor is just high dimensional arrays.

Vocab

- learning rate: step size to multiply gradient by
- epoch: one complete run on all data. A batch size of 100 for 1000 datapoints means 1 epoch = 10 iterations. In genral we don't want to do too many epochs, it lets the model see the same data too many times and overfit
- minibatch: random bunch of data points to do weight update
- SGD: gradient descent using minibatches
- Model architecture: the math function to fit the data with
- Parameters: or weights or coefficients. The knobs to tune for a model
- Loss function: how far away to the target

### Homework

- Make logistic regression optimization animation and blog post
- Make a minimal web app for a model using FastAPI

Commit message:

Add note for matplotlib animation config

notes.md, after:

# Fast.ai course v3 notes by logancyang

The philosophy of this course is to get the hands dirty with code and build as many models as possible to gain experience.

In the [fast.ai forum](https://forums.fast.ai/latest) there is a "Summarize this topic" button for big treads, it shows only the most liked replies.

## Lesson 1 Pets

```py
# Shows the module imported from, function signature with types
# such as url:str, fname:Union[pathlib.Path, str]=None
# Union[...] means it can be any of the type in this list
help(func)

# python3 path object can be used like this
path_img = path/'image'

# ImageDataBunch in fastai has a factory method from_name_re() to use regex to get the data and labels
# Normalize to square image, size 224 is very commonly used
data = ImageDataBunch.from_name_re(
    path_img, fnames, pat, ds_tfms=get_transforms(), size=224, bs=bs
).normalize(imagenet_stats)
```

A `DataBunch` object in fastai contains everything about data. It has training, validation, test data, all the labels.

```py
# normalize the data in the DataBunch object to 0 mean 1 std
# in this case, RGB channels with be 0 mean and 1 std
data.normalize(imagenet_stats)

# Always take a look at the data
data.show_batch(rows=3, figsize=(7,6))

print(data.classes)
# data.c is the number of classes
len(data.classes), data.c
```

`Learner` in fastai is a model object, it takes in the `DataBunch` object and model architecture. It also let you specify the metric to look at for training.

```py
# Note that models.resnet34 is pretrained on imagenet
# error_rate is for validation set, because creating a DataBunch object automatically creates the validation set
learn = cnn_learner(data, models.resnet34, metrics=error_rate)
learn.model
# fit_one_cycle() is much better than fit() (paper in 2018), always use it. 4 is the # epoch to run, it's a good place to start
learn.fit_one_cycle(4)
# This can saves the model trained on different DataBunch to different places
learn.save('stage-1')
```

To interpret the output of a learner,

```py
# ClassificationInterpretation has a factory method from_learner,
# it takes in a learner object and returns a ClassificationInterpretation object
interp = ClassificationInterpretation.from_learner(learn)

losses,idxs = interp.top_losses()
len(data.valid_ds)==len(losses)==len(idxs)

# This is the most useful tool, it plots the examples the model got wrong
# with biggest losses, and show titles as
# `predicted / actual / score for predicted class / score for actual class`
interp.plot_top_losses(9, figsize=(15,11))

# Use doc() to check how to use, click `show in doc` to documentation website for more details and source code
doc(interp.plot_top_losses)

# Another useful tool, confusion matrix
interp.plot_confusion_matrix(figsize=(12,12), dpi=60)

# Yet another, the most useful, prints the most wrong ones (predicted, actual, # times)
interp.most_confused(min_val=2)
```

Previously we called `fit_one_cycle(4)`, **it only trains the last layer!!** The whole model is frozen by default!

*Note: transfer learning is always a two-step process, train the last layer for some epochs first, and then unfreeze the whole model for some more training/fine-tuning*

```py
# After training the last layer, we unfreeze the whole model
learn.unfreeze()
```

When we unfreeze the whole model and retrain, the error rate is actually worse than before.

Now, load the stage 1 model back on again, we need `lr_find` to find a good learning rate. The default learning rate is something like `0.003`. We need to change it.

The learning rate is the most important hyperparameter.

Use `learn.recorder.plot()` to plot `learning rate vs loss` graph and set the learning rate range to the steepest downward slope.

Next, unfreeze the model and use that learning rate

```py
learn.unfreeze()
# Pass a range of learning rate from 1e-6 to 1e-4
# means first layers use 1e-6 and last layers use 1e-4
# Good rule of thumb, set the right side of slice to be 10x smaller
# than default lr, and left to be at least 10x smaller than the lowest
# point in the lr vs loss graph
learn.fit_one_cycle(2, max_lr=slice(1e-6,1e-4))
```

Now it gets better than stage 1!

With these two stages, the model can be already really good. It is at least average Kaggle practitioner level.

Next, we can use a bigger model - resnet50.

If GPU runs out of memory, use smaller batch size. It can be set in the DataBunch creation.

Again, the two-stage workflow

```py
data = ImageDataBunch.from_name_re(path_img, fnames, pat,
    ds_tfms=get_transforms(), size=299, bs=bs//2).normalize(imagenet_stats)

learn = cnn_learner(data, models.resnet50, metrics=error_rate)
# Stage 1
learn.fit_one_cycle(8)
learn.save('stage-1-50')
# Stage 2
learn.unfreeze()
learn.lr_find()
learn.recorder.plot()
# Pick learning rate range around the steepest downward slope
learn.fit_one_cycle(3, max_lr=slice(1e-6,1e-4))
# Evaluation
interp = ClassificationInterpretation.from_learner(learn)
interp.most_confused(min_val=2)
```

Note:
- For an imagenet-style dataset, it has data in folders named with the labels. MNIST for example, has images for `3` in a folder named `3`. Use `ImageDataBunch.from_folder(...)`
- For a csv file with columns `[filepath, label]`, use `ImageDataBunch.from_csv(...)`
- For data where labels are in the filename, use regex and `ImageDataBunch.from_name_re(...)`
- For more complex cases, construct any function and pass into `ImageDataBunch.from_name_func(...)`

What's really cool is that the documentation of fastai is actually a collection of Jupyter Notebooks with working example code!

Success story: a fastai alumnus created a security anomaly detection software by using the exact code for this lesson on mouse trajectories.

There are examples where problems can be converted into an image problem and apply CNN. Such as audio to spectral form.

### Homework 1

Use my own dataset to train an image classifier.

## Lesson 2 Data Cleaning and Production. SGD from Scratch

The notebook "Lesson 2 Download" has code for downloading images from Google images search result in parallel. It is a great way to create my own image dataset.

Note: `ImageDataBunch` can create validation set with `valid_pct`. ALWAYS SET RANDOM SEED BEFORE CREATING THE VALIDATION SET. We need the same validation set for each run.

Other times, randomness is good because we need to know the model runs stably with randomness.

DL models are pretty good at randomly noisy data. But "biased noisy" data is not good.

```py
# Fastai way of opening an image for inspection
img = open_image(path/'black'/'00000021.jpg')
```

### Facilitate experiments with notebook GUI widgets

There is an in-notebook GUI widget called `fastai.widgets.ImageCleaner` for cleaning the dataset. It has buttons to remove problematic examples and creates a new cleaned.csv from where you can create a new ImageDataBunch with the corrected labels to continue training your model.

These things are called `ipywidgets`.

### Put models in production

Inference on CPU is good enough for the vast majority of use cases. Inference on GPU is a big hassle, you have to deal with batching and queueing, etc. Unless the website has extremely high traffic, inferece on CPU is a much better choice, and it can be horizontally scaled easily.

```py
defaults.device = torch.device('cpu')
# Open image for inspection
img = open_image(path/'black'/'00000021.jpg')
img
```

The code below loads the trained model and is run at web app starting time once, should run fairly quickly.

```py
# We create our Learner in production enviromnent like this, just make sure that path contains the file 'export.pkl' from before
learn = load_learner(path)
```

Then we can do inference in the web application,

```
# inference
pred_class, pred_idx, outputs = learn.predict(img)
pred_class
```

The endpoint should look like (this example is for Starlette app)

```py
@app.route("/classify-url", methods=["GET"])
async def classify_url(request):
    bytes = await get_bytes(request.query_params["url"])
    img = open_image(BytesIO(bytes))
    _,_,losses = learner.predict(img)
    return JSONResponse({
        "predictions": sorted(
            zip(cat_learner.data.classes, map(float, losses)),
            key=lambda p: p[1],
            reverse=True
        )
    })
```

Note: Starlette is similar to Flask but supports modern `async` and `await` for Python 3. FastAPI is another option.

### Common Training Problems

- Learning rate
- Number of epochs

If validation loss explodes, learning rate is too high. **Decrease the learning rate.**

If training loss is higher than validation loss, it means **underfitting**, either learning rate is too low or number of epochs too low. **Try higher learning rate or more epochs**.

If the **error rate goes down and up again**, it's probably **overfitting**. But it's pretty hard to overfit with the settings in fastai here. In this case, if the learning rate is already good and the model is trained a long time but we are still not satisfied with the error rate (note fastai error rate is always validation error), it can mean that we **need more data**. There is no shortcut to know how much data we need in advance. But sometimes we don't need that much data we thought we needed.

*Note: Some say if training loss is lower than validation loss, it's overfitting. IT IS NOT TRUE!! Any model that's trained correctly always have training loss lower than validation loss. That is right.*

*Another note: unbalanced classes is often NOT a problem, it just works. Jeremy spent years experimenting and thinks it's not a problem, no need to do oversampling for less common classes, it just works.*

Rule of thumb for training flow and setting learning rate

```py
default_lr = 3e-3
learn.fit_one_cycle(4, default_lr)
learn.unfreeze()
learn.fit_one_cycle(4, slice(steepest_pt_in_plot, default_lr/10))
```

In Lesson 2 SGD notebook, we generate some data points for a linear regression.

```py
n=100
# tensor n by 2, all ones
x = torch.ones(n,2)
# In PyTorch, any function that ends with _ means no return and modify in-place!
# With ., int becomes float
x[:,0].uniform_(-1.,1)
x[:5]
a = tensor(3.,2)
# Note in Python '@' is matmult. It's more general tensor product in pytorch
y = x@a + torch.rand(n)
```

The above is 95% we need to know about PyTorch
- create a tensor
- update a tensor
- tensor product

Note: The `rank` of a tensor is the number of dimensions, or axes. An RGB image is a rank 3 tensor. A vector is a rank 1 tensor. Tensor is just high dimensional arrays.

Trick: for `matplotlib` animations, set `rc('animation', html='jshtml')` instead of `%matplotlib notebook`.

Vocab

- learning rate: step size to multiply gradient by
- epoch: one complete run on all data. A batch size of 100 for 1000 datapoints means 1 epoch = 10 iterations. In genral we don't want to do too many epochs, it lets the model see the same data too many times and overfit
- minibatch: random bunch of data points to do weight update
- SGD: gradient descent using minibatches
- Model architecture: the math function to fit the data with
- Parameters: or weights or coefficients. The knobs to tune for a model
- Loss function: how far away to the target

### Homework

- Make logistic regression optimization animation and blog post
- Make a minimal web app for a model using FastAPI
